Well, welcome Dr. Peat.
Thank you again so much for being available to me.
It's a great pleasure and privilege to say the least.
So what I wanted to discuss today, as I just mentioned to you before we started recording,
are various aspects of what's becoming very, very, very dura-gur, very big now, is the
ketogenic diet,
in particular for dealing with cancer
and a number of other degenerative diseases.
So the diet that, in particular,
the guy who's written, I think, the best about it,
although he is not a physician, he's a PhD biologist,
you probably have heard of him. although he is not a physician, he's a PhD biologist.
You probably have heard of him. That is Dr. Seyfried, Dr. Thomas Seyfried
at Boston College, yes?
Yeah, I don't really know anything about him,
but I've heard of him.
Okay, so he wrote a rather big book on all of this, where he was basically challenging,
which I know is certainly in your ballpark, the genetic aspect of disease and saying,
no, it ain't genetics.
It's the basic metabolic aspects of the body.
And what he has been researching and has quite a number of
people now who are coming to these meetings on a yearly basis about the use
of a restricted ketogenic diet, keeping the ketones up and the glucose down so
that the ratio between glucose and ketones is in the nature of one. That is, you know, the ketones,
the glucose divided by the ketone measurements
coming to a ratio of one, which is pretty,
pretty heavy duty.
And I've begun to experiment with that
just to get a sense of what happens to my body as I use it. And I'm
certainly noticing that when I eat too much protein, bordering on what would
usually be accepted as good, that is about about one gram of protein per
kilo, my glucose stays too high and the ketones don't come up sufficiently.
Anyway, what are your thoughts about that concept of the restricted ketogenic diet
and its good possible good aspects and what do you see as the deficits?
and what do you see as the deficits?
I think the basic worry is that the cortisol level
is going to be kept up if you keep your cortisol, keep your glucose too low.
But one of the things that there are quite a few
publications on now is the ketone body ratio,
and what they talk about usually as ketones, actually one of them isn't a ketone at all,
and the ratio of these so-called ketone bodies, acetoacetate and I guess it's. But anyway, the alpha beta hydroxy butyrate is the other one,
acetoacetate and the beta hydroxy. And the hydroxy is a hydroxy or an alcohol, not a ketone. And the cancer physiology is high in the hydroxys, the reduced form,
and low in the actual ketones. And what you want is the actual high ketone ratio, high ketone body ratio, keeping the alcohols low,
because that goes with the NADH,
NAD ratio being in cancer,
the NADH reduced form is higher,
and the lactate pyruvate ratio in cancer is high.
the lactate pyruvate ratio in cancer is high.
All of the cell components shift in the direction of reduction in cancer.
And so when you're starving or diabetic,
typically you go heavily towards the reduced state of the cell because the
fatty acids block pyruvic dehydrogenase, which is how you're oxidizing glucose normally.
The Randall cycle, in which you have a competition between glucose oxidation and fatty acid oxidation.
It's that the fatty acids which rise in stress block the pyruvic dehydrogenase,
keeping you from oxidizing glucose. And this is the state of diabetes or stress or starvation.
And it involves the failure to fully oxidize the lactic acid pyruvate pair or the NADH-NAD pair,
ascorbic acid and dehydroascorbate.
In the healthy cell,
ascorbic acid is in the highly oxidized form.
In the cancer cell, it goes the other way.
So the whole shift of stress and cancer
is away from oxidation towards reduction. And fatty acids are right at the center of
that by blocking the dehydrogenase. Okay, well in terms of just what you're just speaking about, as you
know I'm sure, Linus Pauling got really huge on vitamin C and it is interesting
that the NIH never gave him $50,000 which is all he was asking for to do
research on the importance of vitamin C. But how do you see his notion about,
I think he was talking about 10,000 milligrams
of vitamin C a day, and he didn't care what kind it was,
he just said, you know, get the cheapest you can.
How would that play a part in what you were just talking
about in terms of that?
Robert Cathcart advocated taking vitamin C to bowel tolerance.
And I said, well, laxatives are good, especially for cancer patients.
And bowel tolerance means cathartic effect.
And I think that's a big part of those huge doses of oral vitamin C. But the metabolic effect of vitamin C
is as an oxidant. Since it's in the dehydro-oxidized form inside the cell,
it's really functioning primarily as an oxidant,
protecting the various apparatuses of the cell
by keeping them, their folding, conformation,
everything is regulated by whether they're oxidized
or reduced, and so the oxidized state of vitamin C
is one of the essential things for keeping the
electrons guided away from disruption and towards the oxygen elimination.
Okay, so that would be also along the lines, if I understand it correctly, of what adequate
maintenance of carbon dioxide in the system would do as well. That is,
it would restore the proteins through the cardinal adsorbent property.
Yeah. Yeah. The vitamin C is doing it catalytically, actually moving electrons through
it on the way to being consumed by oxygen and producing eventually the carbon dioxide balance
instead of lactic acid.
But the carbon dioxide,
rather than being a catalyst
in the sense of moving electrons,
it's slightly retracting electrons
from the whole protein system.
And this is what Centrogy visualized vitamin C as doing.
He and Pauling talked about that a lot.
And I think they agreed on that,
that vitamin C was a very good candidate
with its activated carbonyl groups as the equivalent. Carbon dioxide has its
basically carbonyl structure and vitamin C has its like an extension of carbon dioxide. So
what it's doing is apart from its catalytic movement of electrons, it's pulling
partial oxidation, shifting the reactivity and the pH, or dissociation constant of the proteins,
making the proteins more acidic. So the whole system is shifted to a more oxidized state. And in that state, sulfhydryls, that's the
glutathione, the thiol group of glutathione, when you get oxidized, you get the GSSG structure rather than the GSH structure.
So when you have the oxidized glutathiones
or disulfide bonds, the cell is relatively locked up
and tightly structured so that it runs like a tight machine.
When you reduce it, get free electrons
and the dissociation constants and redox balance
in the direction of the more sulfhydryls,
then you favor de-differentiation and the promotion of cell division rather than differentiated
function. famous biologist who just died a few years ago, was in the 1950s, his co-worker was a Japanese
whose last name was Dan, but Dan Mezian and this assistant of his demonstrated that staining for sulfhydryl reduced state. All through the
mitotic process, the cell is loaded with sulfhydryl glucose.
Well, now, you know, we've spoken before about, and there's a huge amount, of course, that's been speaking about glutathione,
but never in the detail that you're talking about.
It's talked about usually as an antioxidant,
and then inositolcysteine and alpha-lipoic acid together as precursors
for your body to make the more glutathione.
That ideology has come up since the 1950s with Harmon's free radical oxidative damage theory of aging, and that has its own history.
Partly it was pushed ahead in the around 1942, I think it was,
Chickens and lab animals were experiencing brain and gonadal degeneration, softening of the brain and decomposition of the testes.
And it turned out that it was a vitamin E deficiency caused by feeding them too much of the unsaturated fatty acids.
And up until that time, vitamin E had been considered the anti-estrogen, anti-clotting,
heart protective, anti-inflammatory vitamin. Suddenly, because of the brain gonad diseases, it shifted to becoming conceived as
an antioxidant. And then those diseases associated with eating unsaturated fats and not enough vitamin E led to the thought that disease, degenerative diseases
preventable by vitamin E are an anti-estrogen.
The PUFA degenerative process was really a promotion of estrogenic antiphyroid processes,
and vitamin E was exercising its prothyroid anti-estrogen function. So I think the whole thing went wrong between about 1942
and when Harmon wrote his famous article
on oxidative theory of aging.
So now glutathione, rather than integrating Dan Asia's work showing that the glutathione
pops up sharply during the mitotic process and then disappears, you can hardly identify any by staining in the differentiated cell.
But in the dividing cell, it's all, it's just like a black blob of glutathione, highly reduced.
And if people have that image in their mind, that the healthy cell is oxidized with very little free thiol, very little free glutathione
compared to the oxidized part of it, then people would not be so free about eating or injecting
glutathione. I think it's likely to promote cancer growth, for example.
Hmm. Well, and it's become in many circles, as I'm sure you're aware,
glutathione has become sort of like King and taking a lot of the precursors
like in acetylcysteine and alpha lipoic acid, you know, are a big thing.
And as you say, they even have, they have patches,
glutathione patches, which are very expensive,
which you put on to get more glutathione
coming into your system.
So that's it.
Now, you've often spoken about vitamin E in many contexts.
And so I'm getting that the protective aspect
of vitamin E that you're talking about here is not directly related, if I'm getting that the protective aspect of vitamin E that you're talking about here
is not directly related, if I'm correct, not directly related to the notion of a antioxidative
effect, but rather is the anti-estrogenic effect.
Am I correct?
Yeah.
And anti-inflammatory, same idea, and pro-thyroid.
Yes. And what type of vitamin E, or doesn't it make any difference? Yeah, and anti-inflammatory, same idea, and prothyroid.
Yes, and what type of vitamin E, or doesn't it make any difference?
Like the tocopherols are usually recommended, you know, the big tocopherols.
But what, does it make any difference, or what vitamin E in particular? As long as they're the dextroform, I think they all have overlapping functions.
The dextroform, I'm not familiar with what that means.
D-alpha.
Oh, D-alpha, okay, I'm sorry.
Not D-L.
D-alpha, okay, very good, all right.
Now, get back to what you were just talking about,
about people having diarrhea from taking too much vitamin C, or the notion of
bowel tolerance. What Seyfried, this is again coming back to Thomas Seyfried at
Boston College, the biologist there who's written pretty good stuff about the notion
about the ketogenic diet.
What he's saying is that's crucial is not too much protein
and slightly restricted diet.
Now I remember some time ago, you speaking about
or hearing you speak about or write about
that the notion that the low calorie diet
was so life-giving,
and you'd see these people,
I remember Seyfried has this funny comment
which he says, well, he saw a bunch of these people
who there's a society for very low-calorie people,
and he said they all sit around in meetings
and share one grape.
But if I remember correctly you were saying that
the key there was not necessarily the reduced calories but rather maybe I'm
wrong but it was something about vitamin b6 that you had spoken about in regard
to or something else that did. Oh well there are several things that yeah the
type of protein is really crucial that That's why I have talked about
Gelatin because it's free of the sulfur
amino acids cysteine and methionine and
tryptophan and these all
These are the
three
potentially toxic
amino acids.
Cysteine is involved in excitotoxic damage
of the brain cells.
Tryptophan is in various ways pro-inflammatory.
And just restricting a diet for one of these,
either the sulfur amino acids or tryptophan,
for example, a methionine-free diet extended rats or mice,
I forget which, longevity by 40%.
And a tryptophan-deprived or limited diet
extends longevity and degenerative,
eliminates degenerative processes.
And the other thing in a low-calorie diet,
I think the main thing is less polyunsaturated fat,
but also less of the heavy metals that interact with PUFA.
Yeah, well now they also start quoting, which I know you've spoken to before, the
China study. And in the China study, one of the things he's pointing to also is
keeping the percentage of protein, complete proteins low, but doesn't speak to
this issue that you're talking about, about these specific ones, cysteine, methionine,
and tryptophan, which raise also parathyroid hormone, if I'm... that's one of the measures
that you can look at?
Well, inflammation goes with parathyroid,
but I don't think they,
I haven't seen anything specific about that being studied.
Well, what was the, there's a blood, I'm forgetting now,
there was a blood test that, I believe it was a blood test that Danny has spoken
about and you'd spoken about that had to do with parathyroid and, um, um,
well, um,
magnesium calcium and vitamin D are important for keeping your parathyroid
hormone low.
Magnesium, vitamin D, and calcium.
Oh, right, and calcium.
Now, milk, which of course you are very heavily in favor of people drinking on a regular basis.
I'm starting to look at getting the raw milk, good quality, high quality raw milk
in the New York area,
which I think I've got a good source of.
So milk, it doesn't present the same kind of issue.
Milk and good cheeses don't present this issue as much.
Am I correct?
I think it's that the,
there are some peptides in casein
that seem to be anti-stress,
but I think mainly it's the
high calcium content that pushes your parathyroid hormone down and parathyroid
hormone is a promoter of inflammation and so then the tryptophan is effectively defanged by taking your vitamin D and calcium high.
Yes, as I understand it from a conversation you had with Danny, that you pretty much kept
your calcium levels up, the consummation of calcium up to 2,500 milligrams a day on an average for many years now.
Yeah, and most of that you're getting through the milk or?
Milk and cheese.
I think I probably on average get closer
to 3000 milligrams per day for foods.
Now, how does that match with the notion of the paleo people?
But going back before that with the China study,
the notion that green plants, consuming green plants,
a large amount of green plants, also provide that?
Yeah, they're great sources of calcium and magnesium, but the trouble is that
the green plants are the energy source of that plant organism, and they're susceptible to being grazed.
And so the plants, liking to survive,
put bitter and toxic components into the leaves
to discourage grazing.
And especially when they're raw, green leaves
are very bad for the system.
They damage the intestine and the ability
to digest proteins, for example.
And so the plant intends them to be bad food,
but by cooking them and choosing young leaves,
you can pretty well defend yourself against those plant toxic defenses.
Well, is that part of why the ruminants like cows and so on and horses,
that they seem to be able to tolerate that stuff well because of the long time of digestion?
Well, they set it aside into the rumen and let bacteria and fungus break it down.
Uh-huh. I see.
Mammals don't contain the necessary, the plants outsmarted mammals in general, but then cows
set up their own chemical processing lab using microorganisms to work. That's wonderful, I love it.
Okay, all right, so now next piece
about this ketogenic diet that Seyfried is talking about,
and I don't, I'm resisting buying that book,
it's too expensive, it's about $100, his big book.
I'm trying to find more specifics some other
way about what he's talking about. But he's speaking about an interesting combination
of the ketogenic, the restrictive ketogenic diet, low amount of protein and calories, along with, of all things, hyperbaric oxygen.
They don't know about the concept of reduced breathing,
raising carbon dioxide to achieve a much better result.
I remember you talking about that person who had,
was it a tumor, I think on his on his on in his throat, and they
put him in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber with 5% carbon dioxide, and it just dissolved the tumor.
Well, it relieved the congestion enough that he could suddenly talk.
Yeah, and if I understand correctly, part of what was going on was that the idea of
the hydrophilic aspect of the tissue, and then the water was just sort of let go by
using the carbon dioxide to re... The pH, if you take jello and add soda to it to raise the pH, it liquefies.
And if you acidify it, it contracts and gives off water.
That's a general thing about protein gels.
And the cell behaves exactly that way. Raise the pH and it swells up and
becomes reduced and tends to divide. And the carbon dioxide lowers the pH of the protein system,
makes it simply squeeze out the water just like a jelly does a physical, simple physical change, there's lower affinity for water.
And the electrons are retracted in effect as the pH goes down.
So this is when you talk about estrogen, histamine, and nitric oxide increasing the structural temperature of the water
and destabilizing the cell, and then progesterone, cholesterol, oxygen, and carbon dioxide have the opposing effect.
If we're getting people to breathe less and conserve their carbon dioxide, the same thing is going to be happening. Yeah, and if you look at the difference between estrogen and progesterone structurally, you see
the same ketone groups in progesterone and the hydroxy group in estrogen. Okay.
So I think that pretty much gets us through the pieces
about the ketogenic diet. And I think what's happening is that they've simply,
they've hooked onto something, but I don't think,
at least what I've seen so far,
they don't have the explicitness that you're speaking about, which would probably lead them in a better direction
if they understood that, because they're mixing things together.
For example, you've spoken often about if you're going to eat animal protein, which
is fine, do not just eat muscle meats. You need to use organ
meats as well, and of course an egg has everything, so it makes it a little bit
easier because it's got everything together. The meat has a very bad ratio
of phosphate to calcium, for example. I think that's its biggest drawback,
besides the high iron content, but it's just
got a terrible excess of phosphate. Same as beans. Beans and meat are phosphate dangerous.
So you recommend for people, for example, that they have liver, beef liver, a couple
of times a week, a modest amount,
along with some shellfish.
And you don't seem to have any concern
about where that shellfish comes from.
Oh, sure.
Argentina and Maine are probably still good.
Peru.
Yeah, they have shellfish that you can get,
which are called wild caught versus farms.
Most people don't realize an awful lot of shrimp
are being raised in a farm, in shrimp farms, which
are probably pretty damn toxic the same way
that some of the fish farms are.
Yeah, I think you definitely should avoid the sea caught
fish or shellfish from Japan and Korea.
And there are many places around Europe
where there is nuclear contamination, as well
as toxic efflorescence industry.
So the whole northern European, I would say, would be avoided.
Yeah, I think that's a, you know, I've seen many people quoting you about using shellfish,
but they don't recognize that you're just as careful about, you know,
where the source of different good foods
is coming from as anybody is, you know,
and I think that's important,
but people just seem to latch on to just the idea,
well, let's just get some good liver
and let's get some good shellfish,
rather than recognizing that you're pretty selective about,
in fact, you notice how your system reacts to something that you're eating, and if it doesn't react well, you figure
this is not a good thing, I'm going to look for another similar product. Yeah, that has happened
with organic milk several times. We had bad reactions, and it tasted bad. And once we looked up where the dairy was because it tasted so funny and there was a
military metallurgical factory up the highway, Huaqiang, and looking on Google we saw that our organic raw milk dairy was just about a mile downwind from
this horrible stinking factory. And even though it was organic, it apparently had absorbed
some of the bad smells from the industry.
Yeah. Well, there were that whole group of Hollywood actors, including John Wayne, who were doing movies,
years downwind of the atomic bomb exercises.
And of course, they died of cancer.
Quite a number of them who were working on those movies
that were working downwind of those explosions,
which of course had huge exposure.
Okay, so now if we could move on to,
thank you very much, it's been very helpful.
Move on to the whole thing that you and I have discussed,
but I've not quite nailed it down yet,
and I think I'm getting closer,
to how carbon dioxide does function
in terms of why people over breathe
and continue to over breathe,
which is obviously bad for you,
versus people, you know, once they've done the Buteyko work,
for example, or any form that helps you
to reduce your breathing,
and that if you maintain it long enough,
your body regulates itself, which may be because if you have
sufficient maintenance long enough of carbon dioxide in your system
then the whole system the proteins in the system are really well set up and
You you don't have the stress you can manage the stress much better
You're not going to get away from stress, but you can manage it much better if your body's well conditioned that way. And again, the notion that is promulgated
in mainstream and in most of the practitioners of Buteyko's work and similar work is that
it's carbon dioxide is not the issue, although that's important. It's the acidifying effect of
the carbon dioxide going into solution that raises the acidity of the blood
properly, not carbon dioxide itself that's making the difference. And so they
then refer to the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, which you pointed out is a little
bit off, and talking about how, well, because of the broad brain barrier, the only way you
can manage things is to exit the excess from through your kidneys. kidneys, and then you've got the problem which is you're constantly remaining alkaline in
your blood, and so you're going to over-breathe over and over and over again.
It never quite made sense to me, and so I'm thinking that maybe it's more along the lines of that the body without sufficient carbon dioxide
is in a spastic that cells are spasming that you know there's a spasming process that goes on.
Yeah I think meaningless excitation is what a spasm is. Yes. And I think that's why at menopause, when women are overdosed with estrogen relative
to the anti-estrogens, androgens and progesterone, estrogen is a nerve muscle excitant and women women at menopause typically hyperventilate. And one of the ways estrogen acts
is to increase nitric oxide.
And in the brain, nitric oxide,
like histamine, is an excitant.
Yes, you covered that beautifully
in the last two newsletters,
where you wrote extensively about the various aspects
of nitric oxide.
And I think that's really vital for people
to really understand that,
because it's along with what I'm talking about
just right now is, so if carbon dioxide is low,
then you have this, as you say,
well, toxically functional spasming.
And the system can't quiet down.
And if it can't quiet down, then it's reaching for oxygen,
which is not getting out to the cells and tissues.
And so you try to breathe more
to breathe in more carbon dioxide, oxygen.
But when you're kicking out carbon dioxide more and more,
you can't utilize the oxygen.
So the system is constantly in spasm.
Yeah, in my last newsletter, I talked about the coronary artery spasm that causes angina
pains.
And there's one type of angina that comes on during the night when you're not exercising,
but when this fast-six state
is being increased by stress.
Yes, yeah, I've twice, unfortunately, I was in,
you know, tremendous stress in my life a couple of times,
and one time I started to have angina.
Now, being a Buteyko practitioner and having seen somebody
stop a heart attack, one of my early teachers, I knew what to do to stop it and I did.
I just reduced my breathing drastically and the angina went away, but I was terrified
and I went to the hospital.
Unfortunately, they put, well fortunately or unfortunately, I can't really say, they
put in a stent and it was the wrong kind of stent, the new stent, which didn't ever get pulled
into the endothelium. So it was sitting out there as a kind of an edge to get
thing and it happened again. Again I rescued myself by doing reduced
breathing, drove myself to the hospital and as I came into the hospital I said
hi hello I'm having a heart attack.
And what they did was they put another stent
in the same place, spread it out,
but they used the older stent,
and that one has been absorbed into the endothelium,
so there's no longer that edge that's there.
But it was reducing the breathing dramatically,
which then allowed the vessels to expand and open up a bit sufficiently
so that I didn't have, you know, the worst effect of what could have happened. And that, yeah, go
ahead. A carbon dioxide should be the vascular relaxant. And when you're well saturated with carbon dioxide,
you don't need the emergency nitric oxide dilator,
but it simply relaxes your capillaries
and arteries appropriately.
So the heart doesn't have the resistance,
can pump a lot with very little work.
Yes, early on when Teresa Hale, I was helped,
Teresa Hale is a woman who has the Hale Clinic in England, it's the largest alternative health
clinic in the world, and she came to the United States and contacted me, this was about 1999,
she came here thinking she was going to open up another clinic here, and we were talking about
the Bottego work with my, one of of my original teachers and she said we should talk about the hidden
secret which is when you're breathing gets much better your erectile function
gets much better you don't need Viagra you know so that's been a piece that's
come along there but it you know we don't talk about it much,
but it should be talked about.
I've had clients who, after they work with me,
have said, you know, the flagpole is up.
Now I laugh because it was a similar statement
that was made in the video with the China syndrome piece,
for one of this lovely man.
So okay, so I think maybe in this,
I'm getting closer to I think what really does happen,
which is this spasming as a consequence
of low carbon dioxide.
It can't function as adequately as a cardinal absorbent.
The entire system is in a destructured, destabilized
circumstance and so the body is crying for what it can't get and so it gets you
to breathe more and more and more and continue to do so. And the only way to
really stop that, two things. One, now you have talked before, I tried it,
but I wasn't successful at it,
of taking carbon dioxide in a canister
and putting it into a plastic bag and wrapping it around,
you said you and your wife every once in a while
you sit around with a bag.
And I wasn't very successful at that I guess the
carbon dioxide was escaping or somehow I wasn't getting enough but the idea there
was that you were getting it absorbed through the skin and similarly that you
know you could probably take a bath in sodium bicarbonate I don't know yeah there was this old article I think about 1908 a
guy was praising the effects he said it was like a vacation at the beach to take
a bath just fill a bathtub with it because it's heavy and sit in the
bathtub for half an hour oh you mean you just poured carbon dioxide into the bathtub since it's heavy. Wow, that's cool. Well, that, that, if you don't
move to get nobody to move around in the room so you don't get any stirring of the air. When you
handle the bag, you feel the bag and you can feel it. It's very heavy. And so you have to hold the
bag open and step into it, like you're climbing into a tub and then when you get into it you take this take the neck shut so it doesn't
squeeze out now I as I said I wasn't successful at that you need a pretty
damn big bag I got one of these great big leaf bags but I maybe I just didn't
get enough carbon dioxide into it and of course you don't want to have it. You have to start with the bag squeezed empty and then fill it up so it's pure CO2.
Ah, and also you need to...
You can feel it, especially on your crotch where the skin is sensitive, it's hot immediately.
You can feel it soaking right in.
Yeah.
You get pink after about half an hour. And that pinkness lasts usually for a few hours,
meaning that your body is pretty well saturated.
And I would assume that you don't wanna have any clothes on
when you do that.
It doesn't matter, it goes right through the clothes.
Oh, cool.
All right, very good.
Because I was recommending if people wanted to try it,
that they should be very comfortable
with being nude with somebody else.
Okay, well, Dr. Peat, I just
want to thank you. This has been very informative as always. If you don't mind,
I would like to send a copy of this to Danny, Danny Roddy, and what Danny wants
to do is to put some of these on YouTube. Would that be all right with you? Yeah, I
think so. Okay, let me...
YouTube would that be all right with you? Yeah, I think so. Okay.